# Create Command

## PROCEDURE
SQL Stored Procedures for SQL Server

What is a Stored Procedure?
- A stored procedure is a prepared SQL code that you can save, so the code can be reused over and over again

- So if you have an SQL query that you write over and over again, save it as a stored procedure, and then just call it to execute it.

- You can also pass parameters to a stored procedure, so that the stored procedure can act based on the parameter value(s) that is passed.


Stored Procedure Syntax
```sql
CREATE PROCEDURE procedure_name
AS
sql_statement
GO; 
```

Execute a Stored Procedure
```sql
EXEC procedure_name; 
```

The following SQL statement creates a stored procedure named "SelectAllCustomers" that selects all records from the "Customers" table:
```sql
CREATE PROCEDURE SelectAllCustomers
AS
SELECT * FROM Customers
GO;
```

Execute the stored procedure above as follows:
```sql
EXEC SelectAllCustomers;
```

### Stored Procedure With One Parameter
The following SQL statement creates a stored procedure that selects Customers from a particular City from the "Customers" table:
```sql
CREATE PROCEDURE SelectAllCustomers @City nvarchar(30)
AS
SELECT * FROM Customers WHERE City = @City
GO;
```

Execute the stored procedure above as follows:
```sql
EXEC SelectAllCustomers @City = 'London'; 
```

### Stored Procedure With Multiple Parameters
Setting up multiple parameters is very easy. Just list each parameter and the data type separated by a comma as shown below.

The following SQL statement creates a stored procedure that selects Customers from a particular City with a particular PostalCode from the "Customers" table:
```sql
CREATE PROCEDURE SelectAllCustomers @City nvarchar(30), @PostalCode nvarchar(10)
AS
SELECT * FROM Customers WHERE City = @City AND PostalCode = @PostalCode
GO;
```

Execute the stored procedure above as follows:
```sql
EXEC SelectAllCustomers @City = 'London', @PostalCode = 'WA1 1DP'; 
```


## CREATE DATABASE
The SQL CREATE DATABASE Statement

The CREATE DATABASE statement is used to create a new SQL database.

Syntax
```sql
CREATE DATABASE databasename; 
```

CREATE DATABASE Example

The following SQL statement creates a database called "testDB":
```sql
CREATE DATABASE testDB;
```

Make sure you have admin privilege before creating any database. Once a database is created, you can check it in the list of databases with the following SQL command: SHOW DATABASES;

## Create Table

### The SQL CREATE TABLE Statement
The CREATE TABLE statement is used to create a new table in a database.
```sql
CREATE TABLE table_name (
    column1 datatype,
    column2 datatype,
    column3 datatype,
   ....
); 
```
The column parameters specify the names of the columns of the table.

The datatype parameter specifies the type of data the column can hold (e.g. varchar, integer, date, etc.).

For an overview of the available data types, go to our complete Data Types Reference.

### SQL CREATE TABLE Example
The following example creates a table called "Persons" that contains five columns: PersonID, LastName, FirstName, Address, and City:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    PersonID int,
    LastName varchar(255),
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Address varchar(255),
    City varchar(255)
);
```

The PersonID column is of type int and will hold an integer.

The LastName, FirstName, Address, and City columns are of type varchar and will hold characters, and the maximum length for these fields is 255 characters.

### Create Table Using Another Table
A copy of an existing table can also be created using CREATE TABLE.

The new table gets the same column definitions. All columns or specific columns can be selected.

If you create a new table using an existing table, the new table will be filled with the existing values from the old table.
```sql
CREATE TABLE new_table_name AS
    SELECT column1, column2,...
    FROM existing_table_name
    WHERE ....; 
```

The following SQL creates a new table called "TestTables" (which is a copy of the "Customers" table): 
```sql
CREATE TABLE TestTable AS
SELECT customername, contactname
FROM customers; 
```

## Constraints
SQL constraints are used to specify rules for data in a table.

### SQL Create Constraints
Constraints can be specified when the table is created with the CREATE TABLE statement, or after the table is created with the ALTER TABLE statement.

```sql
CREATE TABLE table_name (
    column1 datatype constraint,
    column2 datatype constraint,
    column3 datatype constraint,
    ....
);
```

### SQL Constraints
SQL constraints are used to specify rules for the data in a table.

Constraints are used to limit the type of data that can go into a table. This ensures the accuracy and reliability of the data in the table. If there is any violation between the constraint and the data action, the action is aborted.

Constraints can be column level or table level. Column level constraints apply to a column, and table level constraints apply to the whole table.

The following constraints are commonly used in SQL:
```
NOT NULL - Ensures that a column cannot have a NULL value
UNIQUE - Ensures that all values in a column are different
PRIMARY KEY - A combination of a NOT NULL and UNIQUE. Uniquely identifies each row in a table
FOREIGN KEY - Prevents actions that would destroy links between tables
CHECK - Ensures that the values in a column satisfies a specific condition
DEFAULT - Sets a default value for a column if no value is specified
CREATE INDEX - Used to create and retrieve data from the database very quickly
```

## SQL NOT NULL Constraint
By default, a column can hold NULL values.

The NOT NULL constraint enforces a column to NOT accept NULL values.

This enforces a field to always contain a value, which means that you cannot insert a new record, or update a record without adding a value to this field.

### SQL NOT NULL on CREATE TABLE

The following SQL ensures that the "ID", "LastName", and "FirstName" columns will NOT accept NULL values when the "Persons" table is created:

```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    Age int
); 
```

## SQL UNIQUE Constraint
The UNIQUE constraint ensures that all values in a column are different.

Both the UNIQUE and PRIMARY KEY constraints provide a guarantee for uniqueness for a column or set of columns.

A PRIMARY KEY constraint automatically has a UNIQUE constraint.

However, you can have many UNIQUE constraints per table, but only one PRIMARY KEY constraint per table.

### SQL UNIQUE Constraint on CREATE TABLE
The following SQL creates a UNIQUE constraint on the "ID" column when the "Persons" table is created:

SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL UNIQUE,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int
);
```

MySQL:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int,
    UNIQUE (ID)
); 
```

To name a UNIQUE constraint, and to define a UNIQUE constraint on multiple columns, use the following SQL syntax:

MySQL / SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int,
    CONSTRAINT UC_Person UNIQUE (ID,LastName)
); 
```

## SQL PRIMARY KEY Constraint
The PRIMARY KEY constraint uniquely identifies each record in a table.

Primary keys must contain UNIQUE values, and cannot contain NULL values.

A table can have only ONE primary key; and in the table, this primary key can consist of single or multiple columns (fields).

### SQL PRIMARY KEY on CREATE TABLE
The following SQL creates a PRIMARY KEY on the "ID" column when the "Persons" table is created:

MySQL:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int,
    PRIMARY KEY (ID)
); 
```

SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int
);
```

To allow naming of a PRIMARY KEY constraint, and for defining a PRIMARY KEY constraint on multiple columns, use the following SQL syntax:

MySQL / SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int,
    CONSTRAINT PK_Person PRIMARY KEY (ID,LastName)
); 
```
In the example above there is only ONE PRIMARY KEY (PK_Person). However, the VALUE of the primary key is made up of TWO COLUMNS (ID + LastName).


## SQL FOREIGN KEY Constraint
The FOREIGN KEY constraint is used to prevent actions that would destroy links between tables.

A FOREIGN KEY is a field (or collection of fields) in one table, that refers to the PRIMARY KEY in another table.

The table with the foreign key is called the child table, and the table with the primary key is called the referenced or parent table.

```
Persons Table
PersonID 	LastName 	FirstName 	Age
1 	        Hansen 	    Ola 	    30
2 	        Svendson 	Tove 	    23
3 	        Pettersen 	Kari 	    20
```

```
Orders Table
OrderID 	OrderNumber 	PersonID
1 	        77895 	        3
2 	        44678 	        3
3 	        22456 	        2
4 	        24562 	        1
```
Notice that the "PersonID" column in the "Orders" table points to the "PersonID" column in the "Persons" table.

The "PersonID" column in the "Persons" table is the PRIMARY KEY in the "Persons" table.

The "PersonID" column in the "Orders" table is a FOREIGN KEY in the "Orders" table.

The FOREIGN KEY constraint prevents invalid data from being inserted into the foreign key column, because it has to be one of the values contained in the parent table.

### SQL FOREIGN KEY on CREATE TABLE
The following SQL creates a FOREIGN KEY on the "PersonID" column when the "Orders" table is created:

MySQL:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Orders (
    OrderID int NOT NULL,
    OrderNumber int NOT NULL,
    PersonID int,
    PRIMARY KEY (OrderID),
    FOREIGN KEY (PersonID) REFERENCES Persons(PersonID)
); 
```

SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Orders (
    OrderID int NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
    OrderNumber int NOT NULL,
    PersonID int FOREIGN KEY REFERENCES Persons(PersonID)
); 
```

To allow naming of a FOREIGN KEY constraint, and for defining a FOREIGN KEY constraint on multiple columns, use the following SQL syntax:

MySQL / SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Orders (
    OrderID int NOT NULL,
    OrderNumber int NOT NULL,
    PersonID int,
    PRIMARY KEY (OrderID),
    CONSTRAINT FK_PersonOrder FOREIGN KEY (PersonID)
    REFERENCES Persons(PersonID)
);
```

## SQL CHECK Constraint
The CHECK constraint is used to limit the value range that can be placed in a column.

If you define a CHECK constraint on a column it will allow only certain values for this column.

If you define a CHECK constraint on a table it can limit the values in certain columns based on values in other columns in the row.

### SQL CHECK on CREATE TABLE
The following SQL creates a CHECK constraint on the "Age" column when the "Persons" table is created. The CHECK constraint ensures that the age of a person must be 18, or older:

MySQL:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int,
    CHECK (Age>=18)
); 
```

SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int CHECK (Age>=18)
); 
```

To allow naming of a CHECK constraint, and for defining a CHECK constraint on multiple columns, use the following SQL syntax:

MySQL / SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int,
    City varchar(255),
    CONSTRAINT CHK_Person CHECK (Age>=18 AND City='Sandnes')
); 
```

## SQL DEFAULT Constraint
The DEFAULT constraint is used to set a default value for a column.

The default value will be added to all new records, if no other value is specified.

### SQL DEFAULT on CREATE TABLE
The following SQL sets a DEFAULT value for the "City" column when the "Persons" table is created:

My SQL / SQL Server / Oracle / MS Access:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int,
    City varchar(255) DEFAULT 'Sandnes'
); 
```

The DEFAULT constraint can also be used to insert system values, by using functions like GETDATE():

```sql
CREATE TABLE Orders (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    OrderNumber int NOT NULL,
    OrderDate date DEFAULT GETDATE()
); 
```

## SQL CREATE INDEX Statement
The CREATE INDEX statement is used to create indexes in tables.

Indexes are used to retrieve data from the database more quickly than otherwise. The users cannot see the indexes, they are just used to speed up searches/queries.

Updating a table with indexes takes more time than updating a table without (because the indexes also need an update). So, only create indexes on columns that will be frequently searched against.

### CREATE INDEX Syntax

Creates an index on a table. Duplicate values are allowed:
```sql
CREATE INDEX index_name
ON table_name (column1, column2, ...); 
```

### CREATE UNIQUE INDEX Syntax

Creates a unique index on a table. Duplicate values are not allowed:
```sql
CREATE UNIQUE INDEX index_name
ON table_name (column1, column2, ...); 
```

The syntax for creating indexes varies among different databases. Therefore: Check the syntax for creating indexes in your database.

### CREATE INDEX Example
The SQL statement below creates an index named "idx_lastname" on the "LastName" column in the "Persons" table:
```sql
CREATE INDEX idx_lastname
ON Persons (LastName); 
```

If you want to create an index on a combination of columns, you can list the column names within the parentheses, separated by commas:
```sql
CREATE INDEX idx_pname
ON Persons (LastName, FirstName); 
```

## SQL AUTO INCREMENT Field

### AUTO INCREMENT Field
Auto-increment allows a unique number to be generated automatically when a new record is inserted into a table.

Often this is the primary key field that we would like to be created automatically every time a new record is inserted.

### Syntax for MySQL
The following SQL statement defines the "Personid" column to be an auto-increment primary key field in the "Persons" table:
```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    Personid int NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int,
    PRIMARY KEY (Personid)
); 
```

MySQL uses the AUTO_INCREMENT keyword to perform an auto-increment feature.

By default, the starting value for AUTO_INCREMENT is 1, and it will increment by 1 for each new record.

To let the AUTO_INCREMENT sequence start with another value, use the following SQL statement:

ALTER TABLE Persons AUTO_INCREMENT=100; 

To insert a new record into the "Persons" table, we will NOT have to specify a value for the "Personid" column (a unique value will be added automatically):

```sql
INSERT INTO Persons (FirstName,LastName)
VALUES ('Lars','Monsen'); 
```

The SQL statement above would insert a new record into the "Persons" table. The "Personid" column would be assigned a unique value. The "FirstName" column would be set to "Lars" and the "LastName" column would be set to "Monsen".

### Syntax for SQL Server
The following SQL statement defines the "Personid" column to be an auto-increment primary key field in the "Persons" table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    Personid int IDENTITY(1,1) PRIMARY KEY,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int
); 
```

The MS SQL Server uses the IDENTITY keyword to perform an auto-increment feature. 

In the example above, the starting value for IDENTITY is 1, and it will increment by 1 for each new record.

To specify that the "Personid" column should start at value 10 and increment by 5, change it to IDENTITY(10,5).

To insert a new record into the "Persons" table, we will NOT have to specify a value for the "Personid" column (a unique value will be added automatically):

```sql
INSERT INTO Persons (FirstName,LastName)
VALUES ('Lars','Monsen'); 
```

The SQL statement above would insert a new record into the "Persons" table. The "Personid" column would be assigned a unique value. The "FirstName" column would be set to "Lars" and the "LastName" column would be set to "Monsen".

### Syntax for Access
The following SQL statement defines the "Personid" column to be an auto-increment primary key field in the "Persons" table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons (
    Personid AUTOINCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    LastName varchar(255) NOT NULL,
    FirstName varchar(255),
    Age int
); 
```

The MS Access uses the AUTOINCREMENT keyword to perform an auto-increment feature. 

By default, the starting value for AUTOINCREMENT is 1, and it will increment by 1 for each new record.

To specify that the "Personid" column should start at value 10 and increment by 5, change the autoincrement to AUTOINCREMENT(10,5).

To insert a new record into the "Persons" table, we will NOT have to specify a value for the "Personid" column (a unique value will be added automatically):

```sql
INSERT INTO Persons (FirstName,LastName)
VALUES ('Lars','Monsen'); 
```

The SQL statement above would insert a new record into the "Persons" table. The "Personid" column would be assigned a unique value. The "FirstName" column would be set to "Lars" and the "LastName" column would be set to "Monsen".

### Syntax for Oracle
In Oracle the code is a little bit more tricky.

You will have to create an auto-increment field with the sequence object (this object generates a number sequence).

Use the following CREATE SEQUENCE syntax:

Use the following CREATE SEQUENCE syntax:
```sql
CREATE SEQUENCE seq_person
MINVALUE 1
START WITH 1
INCREMENT BY 1
CACHE 10; 
```

The code above creates a sequence object called seq_person, that starts with 1 and will increment by 1. It will also cache up to 10 values for performance. The cache option specifies how many sequence values will be stored in memory for faster access.

To insert a new record into the "Persons" table, we will have to use the nextval function (this function retrieves the next value from seq_person sequence):

```sql
INSERT INTO Persons (Personid,FirstName,LastName)
VALUES (seq_person.nextval,'Lars','Monsen'); 
```

The SQL statement above would insert a new record into the "Persons" table. The "Personid" column would be assigned the next number from the seq_person sequence. The "FirstName" column would be set to "Lars" and the "LastName" column would be set to "Monsen".

## SQL Views

### SQL CREATE VIEW Statement
In SQL, a view is a virtual table based on the result-set of an SQL statement.

A view contains rows and columns, just like a real table. The fields in a view are fields from one or more real tables in the database.

You can add SQL statements and functions to a view and present the data as if the data were coming from one single table.

A view is created with the CREATE VIEW statement. 

### CREATE VIEW Syntax
```sql
CREATE VIEW view_name AS
SELECT column1, column2, ...
FROM table_name
WHERE condition; 
```

